In May 2015, ARTICLE 19 analysed the Law No 545-IV on Television and Radio Broadcasting (the Law) of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Kazakhstan) for its compliance with international standards on freedom of expression. The Law was adopted by Parliament on 28 December 2011 and signed by President Nazarbayev on 18 January 2012.

This analysis was prepared as part of an initiative led by ARTICLE 19’s
partner in Kazakhstan, the International Foundation for Protection of Freedom
of Speech Adil Soz (Adil Soz), to launch a campaign to develop a “Road Map for
Advancing Media Legislation” in Kazakhstan. Within this initiative, ARTICLE 19
and Adil Soz analyse recent changes to existing laws and codes, as well the
provisions of new laws, related to media freedom and freedom of expression.
The initiative aims to engage the government of Kazakhstan on the integration
of international standards into legislation related to the media, as part of
the government’s enduring commitment to modernisation and global technological
progress.

In 2011, ARTICLE 19 observed that the main challenge in the field of media
regulation in Kazakhstan was the transformation of broadcasting from a regime
of political control to a system whereby broadcasting is ruled by legal norms.
We reiterate that the Law favours governmental control over the media and
fails to provide sufficient and effective safeguards against arbitrary
interference.

ARTICLE 19 believes that this Law is open to abuse by government, having
insufficient safeguards against arbitrary interference. Thus, this law poses a
genuine threat to freedom of expression, as well as freedom of information, in
Kazakhstan.

In the analysis, ARTICLE 19 concludes that the main challenge in the field of
media regulation in Kazakhstan was the transformation of broadcasting from a
regime of political control to a system whereby broadcasting is ruled by legal
norms.

Further, the Law does not establish independence for the broadcasting
regulator, neither does it establish clear and precise procedure for
registration and licensing. In addition, its obligations regarding content
restrictions are unclear- and, in any case, content-related obligations should
be developed in close consultation with relevant stakeholders, and indeed the
public.

ARTICLE 19 calls on the Kazakhstan legislator to consider our recommendations,
and revise the Law accordingly. We also call on civil society and other
stakeholders to advocate for the most progressive legislation in this
important area, and to ensure that regulation of the broadcasting sector fully
complies with international freedom of expression standards.

Summary of recommendations

Powers in the field of regulation or monitoring of the broadcast sector which
are still in the hands of the government and public authorities should be
given to an independent regulatory body;
The status of the regulatory body should be revised and upgraded to that of a
genuine regulatory authority in compliance with international standards;
The Law should include explicit recognition of the major principles of
broadcast regulation, editorial independence of broadcasters, equal and fair
treatment of broadcasters, and promotion of diversity;
The Law should include clear and precise procedures for registrations,
licenses, frequencies, must-carry distribution and digital free-to-air
broadcasting;
The regulatory body should not be able to refuse registrations of foreign
channels, and the definitions of content restrictions should be removed or
reworded in a clear and precise manner;
Regarding the use of national language and the protection of domestic works
and industries, the Law should provide that obligations related to content
should be developed in close consultation with broadcasters and other
interested stakeholders, and should be finalised only after public
consultation;
Regarding the digital switchover, the Law should clarify that the national
broadcasting operator should treat all radio and television channels in a fair
and non discriminatory manner;
Sanctions for violations of the law on broadcasting should be applied by the
regulatory authority, be proportionate and necessary, and make use of a large
range of measures;
Kazakhstan should take necessary measures to transform the public broadcaster
into a public service media provider.
RTICLE 19 and Bytes for All (Pakistan) condemn the proposed three-month
blanket ban on instant messaging and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
services in Sindh Province, Pakistan. The proposal, issued by the Sindh
province authorities last week, should be retracted immediately as it is
incompatible with international standards on freedom of expression.

On Thursday 3 October 2013, the Information Minister for Sindh province
forwarded a summary to the Federal Ministry of Interior to impose a
three-month blanket ban on instant messaging and VoIP services.

The reason for the proposed ban was to combat terrorism and safeguard national
security. The Sindh Information Minister said it was needed because Sindh law
enforcement agencies are unable to monitor VoIP services, which are
increasingly being used by “criminal elements and terrorists”.

The proposed ban is a disproportionate and overly broad measure. It will curb
the fundamental rights of people in Sindh province and undermine the use of
widespread communication platforms. Instant messaging and VoIP services, such
as Skype, Viber, Tango and WhatsApp, are increasingly popular with Pakistani
smartphone users looking for affordable means of communication. All of these
services are now under threat of being suspended. The Sindh province
authorities have not indicated how they will carry out this proposal: whether,
for example, they will use filtering or blocking.

If implemented, the ban will affect the entire Sindh province, which has a
population of over 30.6 million and an estimated 4.5 million Internet users.
Moreover, the ban will have adverse consequences throughout the country,
stifling the communication of individuals, human rights groups and businesses.

 

Incompatibility with international human rights standards

Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), signed and ratified by Pakistan in 2010, requires the government to
protect and promote the right to freedom of expression and information.
Furthermore, in a landmark resolution adopted by consensus in 2012, the UN
Human Rights Council affirmed the principle that the right to freedom of
expression applies online as it does offline (A/HRC/20/13).

Any restriction on the right to freedom of expression and information must
comply with the three-part test under paragraph 3 of Article 19 of the ICCPR
and be:

provided for by law
pursue a legitimate aim; and
be necessary and proportionate.
Therefore, although the right to freedom of expression and information may be
restricted in order to protect public order and national security, the means
used by the State to protect its people from terrorist threats must be
proportionate to this aim.  

ARTICLE 19 and Bytes for All recall that the treaty monitoring body for the
ICCPR, the Human Rights Committee, affirmed in its General Comment No. 34 that
“restrictions on the operation of websites, blogs or any other internet-based
electronic or other such information dissemination system, including systems
to support such communication … are only permissible to the extent that they
are compatible with paragraph 3 [of paragraph 19 of the ICCPR].” Importantly,
the Committee stated that “generic bans on the operation of certain sites and
systems are not compatible with paragraph 3.”

Moreover, in his 2011 thematic report relating to the Internet (A/HRC/17/27),
the UN Special Rapporteur on the right to freedom of opinion and expression
emphasized that cutting users off from the Internet, regardless of the
justification used, is a disproportionate restriction on the right to freedom
of expression (Para. 78).  Further, the Special Rapporteur also stated that:

[P]rotection of national security or countering terrorism cannot be used to
justify restricting the right to expression unless it can be demonstrated
that: (a) the expression is intended to incite imminent violence; (b) it is
likely to incite such violence; and (c) there is a direct and immediate
connection between the expression and the likelihood or occurrence of such
violence. (Para 73).

ARTICLE 19 and Bytes for All also note that the proposed ban could easily be
circumvented by determined users. So the measure is not only disproportionate,
it is also likely to be completely ineffectual. 

 

Crackdown on Internet freedoms in Pakistan

ARTICLE 19 and Bytes for All are extremely concerned about the proposed ban in
the light of the continuous abuses of the right to freedom of expression and
Internet freedoms in Pakistan. These restrictions, claimed to be necessary in
order to protect national security or safeguard the country against terrorism,
have actually infringed upon fundamental rights. Examples of these
restrictions include:

the adoption of the Fair Trial Act of 2012, which vests security agencies with
unprecedented powers regarding citizen surveillance
evidence of Netsweeper being used for web filtering and content censoring
the repeated use of  ‘kill-switch’ tactics, a complete shutdown of all
cellular phone networks,  in several parts of the country.
 

Conclusion

ARTICLE 19 and Bytes for All demand that the Sindh Government and federal
government authorities revoke the proposed ban. We also demand that they
refrain from adopting such measures in the future. In addition, Pakistani
government authorities must ensure that any measures that they introduce to
combat terrorism threats comply with international human rights standards.

Find more on
